MCO-1492: Add runbook SystemMemoryExceedsReservation (#230)
openshift/runbooks: alerts/machine-config-operator/SystemMemoryExceedsReservation.md

# SystemMemoryExceedsReservation

## Meaning

> This alert is triggered when a node is deteced to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert is triggered when a node is detected to
```

Author: Typo Fixed.

> This alert is triggered when a node is detected to

Reviewer 2: This alert is fired when the system daemons (like crio or kubelet) are using 95% of the memory reserved (we call it system reserved memory) for them. e.g. if node has 100 GB of memory, and 5 GB is system reserved memory, this alert will fire when those daemons collectively use about 95% of 5GB. 

So this doesn't mean that node as a whole is consuming memory. But rather system daemons are using 95% memory reserved for them. If now workload on the node starts consuming the memory, then system daemons will not be able to use more than their reserved share of memory and hence this alert is designed to alert system admins about it.

Author: Changed

be using more memory than is reserved by the
kubelet. This alert will fire if the node
is exceeding 95% of the reservation for 15
minutes or more.

## Impact

> This alert is a warning to let a system admin

Reviewer 2: This alert is not about node filling up its allocatable memory. This alert is about system daemons using 95% of the system reserved memory.  You can have a situation where node workload not using any significant amount of memory but system daemons end up consuming 95% of their reserved (say, maybe due to some bug) and in that situation this alert will fire. This is just to let the admins know that in case workload starts using that memory, system daemons will get impacted.

Author: Changed.

know the node is filling up all its allocatable
memory. The node needs this memory in order to
run and satisfy system processes. This alert
firing does not nessarily mean the node is
resource exhausted at the moment.

## Diagnosis

This alert is triggered by an expression
which consists of a Prometheus query. The
full query is as follows:

```console
sum by (node) (container_memory_rss{id="/system.slice"}) > ((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"} - kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)
```

This can be split into two commands with
the greater operator as the split
point.

The right side of the query consists of
static values.

`((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"}-
kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)`

This query takes the total memory capacity of the node
minus the the amount of memory allocatable for pods.

> This gives the amount of memory allocated

Author: Changed

or automatically set it, you must create a
KubeletConfig and give it the appropriate
`machineConfigPoolSelector` so it propagates
to the correct nodes you want to target.

- For manual allocation:
  
  ```console
  apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
  kind: KubeletConfig
  metadata:
    name: set-allocatable
  spec:
    machineConfigPoolSelector:
      matchLabels:
        pools.operator.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker: ""
    kubeletConfig:
      systemReserved:
        cpu: 1000m
        memory: 3Gi
  ```
- For automatic allocation:

  ```console
  apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
  kind: KubeletConfig
  metadata:
    name: dynamic-node
  spec:
    autoSizingReserved: true
    machineConfigPoolSelector:
      matchLabels:
        pools.operator.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker: ""
  ```
If increasing the memory value for
system-reserved is not an option,
you will need to investigate
and troubleshoot which processes
are consuming the host's memory.

The following commands are
useful for troubleshooting:

- You can use the `top` command on
the host to get a dynamic update of
the largest memory consuming proccesses.

> For instance to get the top 100 memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, to get the top 100 memory
```

Author: Typo fixed.

# SystemMemoryExceedsReservation

## Meaning

This alert is triggered when system daemons are
detected to be using more memory
than is reserved by the
kubelet. This alert will fire if system daemons
are exceeding 95% of the reservation for 15
minutes or more.

## Impact

This alert is a warning to let a system admin

> know system daemons are using up all its allocatable

Reviewer 2: system daemons are using up memory equivalent to more than 95% system reserved.

Author: Changed.

memory. The system daemons needs this memory in order to
run and satisfy system processes. If other workloads
start to use this memory then system daemons
can be impacted. This alert
firing does not nessarily mean the node is
resource exhausted at the moment.

## Diagnosis

This alert is triggered by an expression
which consists of a Prometheus query. The
full query is as follows:

```console
sum by (node) (container_memory_rss{id="/system.slice"}) > ((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"} - kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)
```

This can be split into two commands with
the greater operator as the split
point.

The right side of the query consists of
static values.

`((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"}-
kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)`

This query takes the total memory capacity of the node
minus the the amount of memory allocatable for pods.

> This gives the amount of memory allocated

Reviewer 2: this gives the amount of memory reserved for the system daemons.

Author: Changed.

# SystemMemoryExceedsReservation

## Meaning

This alert is triggered when a node is deteced to

> be using more memory then is reserved by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be using more memory than is reserved by the
```

Author: Addressed

kubelet. This alert will fire if the node
is exceeding 95% of the reservation for 15
minutes or more.

## Impact

This alert is a warning to let a system admin
know the node is filling up all its allocatable
memory. The node needs this memory in order to
run and satisfy system processes. This alert
firing does not nessarily mean the node is
resource exhausted at the moment.

## Diagnosis

> This alert is triggered by a expression
> which consists of a Prometheus query. The
> full query is as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert is triggered by an expression
which consists of a Prometheus query. The
full query is as follows:
```

```console
sum by (node) (container_memory_rss{id="/system.slice"}) > ((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"} - kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)
```

> This can be split into two halfs. Using
> the comparator operator, "greater then: `>`" as the split
> point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command can be split into two commands with the greater operator as the split
point.
```

Author: Addressed

> - The right side of the query consists of
> static values.
> 
>   `kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"}`
>   (The total memory capacity of the node)
> 
>   minus
> 
>   `kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"}`
>   (The amount of memory allocatable for pods)
> 
>   This gives the amount of memory allocated
> to the nodes. This is then multiplied by 0.95
> to get the 95th percentile.

Reviewer: Do we need the sum by (node)?

```suggestion
- The right side of the query consists of
static values.

 ((sum by (node) (kube_node_status_capacity{resource="memory"} - kube_node_status_allocatable{resource="memory"})) * 0.95)

   This query takes the total memory capacity of the node 
   minus the the amount of memory allocatable for pods.  
   This gives the amount of memory allocated
to the nodes. This is then multiplied by 0.95
to get the 95th percentile.
```

Author: Addressed. I guess we could leave it out. But it is technically apart of what makes the query work. (Although it's just displaying the results by node.

- The left side of the query consists of a
dynamic value.

  `container_memory_rss{id="/system.slice"}`
(The total resident set slice which is a
portion of the system's memory occupied by
a process that is held in the main memory)

>   if this value is greather then the 95th

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If this value is greather then the 95th
```

Author: Addressed

  percentile of the allocatable memory for
  the node then the alert will go into pending.
  After 15 minutes in this state the alert
  will fire.

> Since this is a comparator operation. If the
> condition is not met, there will be no datapoints
> displayed by the query.

Reviewer: Because is better than Since for translations and such, Since refers to time.

```suggestion
Because this is a comparator operation, if the
condition is not met, there will be no datapoints
displayed by the query.
```

Author: Addressed

## Mitigation

By default the `system-reserved` value
for memory is 1Gi. This value can be changed
manually post install. You can also have
the kubelet automatically determine and allocate the
system-reserved value via a script on each
node. This will take into account the CPU
and memory capacity that is installed on
the node.

> To manually set the system-reserve value
> or automatically set it. You must create a
> KubeletConfig and give it the appropriate
> `machineConfigPoolSelector` so it propagates
> to the correct nodes you want to target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To manually set the system-reserve value
or automatically set it, you must create a
KubeletConfig and give it the appropriate
`machineConfigPoolSelector` so it propagates
to the correct nodes you want to target.
```

Author: Addressed

- For manual allocation:
  
  ```console
  apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
  kind: KubeletConfig
  metadata:
    name: set-allocatable
  spec:
    machineConfigPoolSelector:
      matchLabels:
        pools.operator.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker: ""
    kubeletConfig:
      systemReserved:
        cpu: 1000m
        memory: 3Gi
  ```
- For automatic allocation:

  ```console
  apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
  kind: KubeletConfig
  metadata:
    name: dynamic-node
  spec:
    autoSizingReserved: true
    machineConfigPoolSelector:
      matchLabels:
        pools.operator.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/worker: ""
  ```

> If increasing the memory value for
> system-reserved is not an option.
> Then you'll need to investigate
> and troubleshoot which processes
> are consuming the hosts memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If increasing the memory value for
system-reserved is not an option,
you will need to investigate
and troubleshoot which processes
are consuming the host's memory.
```

Author: Addressed

> Some useful commands for troubleshooting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following commands are useful for troubleshooting:
```

- You can use the `top` command on
the host to get a dynamic update of
the largest memory consuming proccesses.
For instance to get the top 100 memory
consuming processes on a node.

   ```console
     $ oc debug node/<node>
     $ chroot /host
     $ top -b -n100 -d2
   ```

> - Another host level command is the `free`
> command which allows you to check the memory
> statistics of the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Another host-level command is the `free`
command which allows you to check the memory
statistics of the node.
```

- Each node also contains a file called
`/proc/meminfo`. This file provides a usage
report about memory on the system. You can
learn how to interperet the fields [here](https://access.redhat.com/solutions/406773).

> - For kubelet level commands you can get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For kubelet-level commands you can get
```

the memory usage of individual pods by
using the `oc adm top pods` command.
You can further tune it to look at
individual containers by adding the
`--containers=true` flag.

> - Prometheus itself can be used to deep

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Prometheus can be used to deep
```

Author: Addressed
